[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
We are broadcasting from
The Conscious Life Expo
here in Los Angeles.
Let me ask you a question.
Do you feel that you are living
up to your highest potential?
Did you know that
you could actually
change the physiology
of your brain
through a progressive technique
called higher brain living?
It's a revolutionary
gentle-touch technique,
founded by Dr. Michael Cotton.
And it enables you
to shift your energy
from your lower primitive brain
to your prefrontal cortex,
or your higher brain,
where your potential lives.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you for being here.
>>MICHAEL COTTON: My pleasure.
Thanks for inviting me.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
I'm so interested in anything
that has to do with the brain.
So how did you get into this?
How did you discover
higher brain living?
>>COTTON: Well, many years ago
I had a profound experience that
changed the entire
direction of my life.
In fact, I had gone through
life as a very stressed out
child, very anxious,
very fearful.
I have no idea why.
But I developed chronic,
almost disabling headaches.
And I was in and out
doctor's offices.
And nobody could ever help me.
And I just kind of fumbled
my way through life.
And I went to high school.
I managed to somehow
graduate from high school.
But all this without any
real direction or purpose,
and a lot of stress,
and a lot of fear.
I had a good family, good
parenting, a good household.
I don't know what it was from.
But I ended up going to college.
And I started college
because I was just
told that's what you
were supposed to do.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>COTTON: And I got into
the middle of my first year.
And before my first
year was over,
I was asked to leave the college
because I was academically
ineligible with a 0.57 GPA.
0.57.
>>LISA: Wow, OK.
>>COTTON: So I was basically--
>>LISA: Where was this?
In the Midwest?
>>COTTON: This was
in the Midwest.
Yes.
And so I was actually
kicked out of college
because my grades
weren't good enough
to continue by the
end of my first year.
And so I started taking
minimum wage jobs.
I fumbled from one minimum wage
job to the next, just living
for the weekend.
I had no direction, no purpose.
I didn't know who I was
or where I was going.
And I was in my mid 20s,
and at my latest job.
And I was in a steel
and aluminum fabrication
factory covered in grease.
And I was standing there.
And one day, something
just came over me.
And it was like I just woke up.
And there was a surge
of energy in me.
There was a clarity in me.
There was a confidence in me.
The way I describe
it, it was like I
had this view from 50,000 feet.
And I could see my entire
life, how it had led me there.
>>LISA: Was there anything
that had happened?
>>COTTON: Nothing.
There was no
precipitating event.
And that was part of what
put me on this journey
is because it was just like I
had this surge of confidence,
and clarity, and knowing that my
life was going to be radically
different from
that point forward.
I mean, it was a
foregone conclusion.
It was only a question of
how was that going to happen.
And I left the job right then.
And I went and I
got on the phone.
And earlier in my life, I
had had a positive healing
experience with a chiropractor.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>COTTON: So I was just
looking at a path for me.
And I thought well,
that's going to be a step.
And I called the
chiropractic college.
And they, of course,
said well, it's
a four-year
postgraduate program.
It's a doctoral program.
And so you're not getting
in with your 0.57 first year
of college.
So they gave me some direction.
And I found a college
that would take me.
And I enrolled in classes.
And by then, I was just
on fire with passion.
And I just aced
all of my classes.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>COTTON: I started taking
32 credit hours a semester,
more than twice the
normal load of physics,
and chemistry, and biology.
>>LISA: Was it because
you were finally
interested in something?
>>COTTON: Yes, but it
was more than that.
Whatever happened
inside of me is
what got me interested
in something.
>>LISA: It switched on.
>>COTTON: Right.
Something switched on in me.
And I know now what that is.
I know that the dormant part
of the higher brain engaged.
But, at the time, I didn't.
I just knew I had
dramatically changed.
And so I aced all of my classes.
I got into the
professional school.
I did the four-year doctoral
program in three years
on an accelerated program.
I graduated with honors on
the National Deans List.
And I say all of this because
that had not been my history.
>>LISA: It wasn't the case.
>>COTTON: It was not the case.
And so that set me
on this path of I
got just incredibly
curious about why me?
What was that?
Why did that happen?
Why did my life
change so dramatic?
And so that studying
human potential
and human
transformation basically
become my life's passion,
and my life's work,
and still is today.
>>LISA: So you wanted to
find out why that happened?
>>COTTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: And where did you go?
I mean, obviously you
went down this long path,
but where did you
go to find out?
What was that moment?
What was that turning
point for you?
>>COTTON: Well, what I
started doing was just
devouring everything that I
could possibly read, or study,
or participate in
that had anything
to do with personal
transformation,
with self-help, with the
evolution of consciousness,
Eastern philosophies,
Western philosophies.
I mean, I just spent my
life studying all of it
and then starting to learn
different energy work
techniques.
And I started, through
my chiropractic training,
then getting involved
in different quasi-type
chiropractic techniques
and energy techniques.
NSA care was one of them
that had a lot of influence.
And so one of the things that
I found in my search that was
somewhat disturbing was
that what happened to me--
I actually studied 5,000-year
history of personal growth
and transformation.
And I found lots of
references to this kind
of thing happening.
Or even people would report like
the enlightenment experience
and that type of thing.
But the interesting
thing from all
of the literature, all of
the techniques I studied,
and all of the data was that
it didn't happen very often.
It didn't happen to
very many people.
It was very inconsistent and
was often not sustainable.
And even these techniques that
could lead to dramatic change,
it was like 1 out
of 1,000 people
that it would
actually happen with.
And so it got me really trying
to figure out why was that?
If it was possible
for me, if even
maybe even more
dramatic things were
possible for other people--
>>LISA: Right.
>>COTTON: --in the
literature, then
why wasn't it possible for
everyone, or why couldn't it
happen all the time?
And what I know now, what
I'm convinced of now,
is that the missing
link in all of this
is that the literal brain
has to change for our life
to change in those
dramatic ways.
That we have to be
able to get energy
into this new-evolved,
untapped part of our brain,
the prefrontal cortex.
>>LISA: So now did
you equate this
to a spiritual
experience at all?
Did you find that it was a
religious epiphany at all,
or was it just a clarity?
>>COTTON: At the time, I
didn't really-- I mean, all
I knew was that I had
an energy inside of me.
I had a passion inside of me.
I had a confidence inside of me.
And I had a clarity inside of
me that I had never had before.
And it was like
it just turned on.
>>LISA: And now you have now
then equated this to the brain.
Explain, if you
can, the difference
between the lower-brain thinking
and the higher-brain thinking,
the primitive and the
prefrontal cortex.
>>COTTON: Right.
And it's even more
than just thinking.
Those brains really kind
of drive our behavior even.
And so thinking
absolutely is part of it.
In fact, just to
back up a second,
here's a really good way
to kind of understand
the need for getting energy
into that higher brain,
and why so many
things don't lead
to sustainable
transformative change
is that you can learn
positive thoughts.
You can set great goals.
>>LISA: Affirmations.
>>COTTON: Affirmations,
wonderful goals,
great-life strategies,
positive thinking, but what
I'm insisting is that if
those thoughts, and goals,
and affirmations, and
ideas-- if those don't become
anchored to the
prefrontal cortex,
to the higher part
of the brain, which
is the part of the brain that
wants to change, and grow,
and evolve, then
they're just fleeting.
And what happens is they're
anchored to the lower brain.
That's why we don't change.
And so you asked me what's
the difference in the lower
brain and the higher brain?
And so that lower brain
is a very primitive part
of our brain.
A lot of people don't
know this, but the brain
is actually evolved
in stages, in layers.
And the early stage
is what we generically
call this lower brain.
And its job is to protect you
in a predator-rich environment.
Its job is to keep you from
being eaten by a tiger.
>>LISA: In the caveman days, and
that's what we needed to have.
>>COTTON: That's right.
It was fight or flight.
It was how do I get
through the day?
How do I survive in this
hostile, predator-rich world?
That's all that's important, OK?
Spiritual connection,
and purpose, and growth,
and evolution, and finding
your potential-- that's
not important when
you have to survive,
when you have to find food,
and you have to not get eaten.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>COTTON: And so
that lower brain
was in the species for
a very, very long time.
And it's still in the species.
It's not changed since
caveman days, OK?
What's happened is layers build
over that old lower brain.
>>LISA: Through evolution.
>>COTTON: Through evolution.
And now we have--
the latest emergent
is this prefrontal
cortex, this highest,
most evolved part of our brain.
In fact, the researcher
Paul MacLean,
who's the one-- who was
one of the first ones
to really tease out these
discrete layers of brain
development, he refers
to those frontal lobes
and that prefrontal
cortex as the angel
lobes because that's the
part of the brain where
we have that high-end
human experience.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So when we had the industrial
age, and now the technology
age, did that make significant
impacts on those layers
that you're talking about?
I mean, we didn't just go
from primitive to higher.
Did the steps in between
have to do with this?
>>COTTON: Oh, man, are you
ever speaking my language.
>>LISA: Yeah.
I love this.
Yes.
>>COTTON: No, that's
a very, very apt--
those are some dots that I
have connected through this.
And I was going to talk
about this a little later,
but maybe this is a good
place to jump into it.
So just real quick about the
lower brain, higher brain.
So the lower part of the
brain, that is where stress
is produced.
It's designed to keep
us from being eaten, OK?
And it's the same in
us today as it was back
when the environment
was predator-rich.
>>LISA: Because
it's unconscious.
>>COTTON: It's unconscious.
But now we've evolved these
higher brain structures,
but the problem is the research
tells us they're latent,
they're dormant.
The prefrontal cortex is used--
5% to 10% of its potential
is all that's really
used in humanity, OK?
And so there's this
untapped potential.
It's like we evolved, we
emerged the structure,
but we haven't got the energy
in it, and molded it in a way,
and are able to
metabolize it in a way,
and live from
there consistently.
And so the beautiful
point that you just made
is that actually
human civilization
has gone through five
major transformations.
There's a couple of
different models of this.
One of them that's
easy to explain
is the great
historian Jean Gebser
who has measured these
five discrete layers of--
>>LISA: Human evolution.
>>COTTON: Of human evolution,
of cultural evolution, culture
and consciousness over
the last 100,000 years.
>>LISA: Really?
>>COTTON: And they've gone from
this archaic, fight or flight
into a magic, into a
mythic, into a rational,
which you're calling
technological-- he calls
the rational, or mental
structure-- and then
into this postmodern
humanistic stage that we're
kind of all a part of.
>>LISA: So I just
want to grasp this.
So magic, mythics, you
have Plato, Hipocrates,
all of those in the
magic, mythic, and--
>>COTTON: Well,
they were actually
early examples of this
rational stage of development.
Ancient Greece was one
of the first flourishings
of this rational
mental structure,
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>COTTON: Or stage of
consciousness and culture.
>>LISA: I would think so.
OK.
>>COTTON: Yeah.
So what I am suggesting, and
the point that you kind of
intuitively captured there
is that these stages-- each
of these stages of
consciousness evolution
have produced more care, more
compassion, more love, more
consciousness.
That's been a hallmark of this
evolution of consciousness over
a 100,000-year year period in
cultures and in individuals.
And so what I am suggesting
is that it correlates
with these layers
of brain development
that have been layed down
through biological evolution.
>>LISA: OK.
>>COTTON: And so that
there's relationships
between the lower
part of the brain
and these lower
stages of development.
However, this lower
brain, it is still
a strong center of
gravity in most of us.
And it has its hooks
in all of this.
>>LISA: I've heard
90% of our behavior
is based on that
lower brain thinking.
>>COTTON: That's exactly it.
And so getting energy into
that prefrontal cortex,
into that untapped
part of the brain,
I believe is the key not only
to be able to accelerate,
or evolve, consciousness
in us, but it's also
how we're going to create that
next epoch, that next stage
of cultural development,
or human consciousness.
>>LISA: You would explain why
personal development doesn't
work on most people, why new-age
thinking doesn't work on most
people because you
can't take a purpose
and plant it into the
survival center of the brain.
>>COTTON: That's it.
>>LISA: It won't work.
>>COTTON: You better believe it.
It won't work.
And we have kind of
a little catchphrase
we like to use regarding
the lower brain.
And to the lower brain,
sameness equals safety.
The lower brain wants
your life to be the same.
And understand, below
the conscious threshold,
it's dominating your life.
You don't even know
it's happening.
>>LISA: So it fears change.
>>COTTON: It fears change.
Why?
I mean, imagine
100,000 years ago,
you're living in a cave as
this caveman and cave woman.
>>LISA: And the cave
crumbles from something.
And that's threatening
your survival.
>>COTTON: It is.
Or you have to go
and get food, OK?
You have to get
food for your clan.
So you go out of the
cave, and let's say
there's five paths out there.
And this is your first time.
It's a new cave
that you've found.
It's your first time
out of the cave.
Your family is in
there with you.
You go out.
There's five paths.
You turn left down a path.
You walk about 100 yards.
A sabre toothed tiger comes over
the ridge and tries to eat you.
And you run as fast as you can.
And you jump in the cave.
Well, the first thing that
the lower brain did was
register you are not turning
left ever again, right?
The next morning
you're starving.
Your family is starving.
You have to go out.
You're somewhat scared.
You go out, and there's
all these paths here.
And you say OK, what's the
furthest one from left?
I'll take the furthest
one to the right.
You walk right, you walk down.
And now this path is much
more rocky than the other one.
Your feet are now
getting bruised up,
and they're getting bloody.
But you keep on walking.
You keep on going, and
now you're in briars.
And the briars are
cutting your body up.
And now you're in this mucky
swamp, and it smells horrible,
but you keep going.
You get to this
clearing over there
where you're having to
pick these berries out
of these thorny trees that
are cutting your arms up.
And you get enough berries to
eat and go back to your cave.
So you go back exactly the
same way, cutting your feet up.
Well, two days later when
you're starving again,
and you have to go
get food, are you
going to go to the far left?
No way.
Because there's a
tiger over there.
And the lower brain is not
going to let you go there.
>>LISA: Right.
>>COTTON: And it's
also not going
to let you take a chance on
any of those other paths.
It's going to say we're going to
go right, even if your feet get
cut up, even if your body gets
cut up because it did not--
>>LISA: Because it
didn't kill you.
>>COTTON: It didn't kill you.
You got berries.
You got food.
You fed your family.
And that's all the
lower brain cares about.
>>LISA: This would explain
repeating bad habits,
dysfunctional relationships.
>>COTTON: That's exactly it.
That's exactly it.
And in the modern world,
how that plays out
is that in our relationships,
in our finances,
our intellectual brain says
oh, I want to have more money.
Or I don't want to be in
this rotten relationship.
Or I hate the
condition of my body.
Or I don't like
feeling this way.
The lower brain
says that's perfect.
You woke up alive.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>COTTON: That was our job.
And we're going to
do it again tomorrow.
And so you set new goals, new
plans, new visions, new ideas.
And you start out on that
path and the lower brain says,
oh no you don't.
And it cycles you back
into the same life
that allows you to wake up.
>>LISA: So now how did
you equate this concept
of what you're
talking about in terms
of these stages of
the brain development
to what you do with the
higher-brain living?
How did you connect
these two big pieces?
>>COTTON: Well, the
connection there
is that part of our
kind of jumping ahead
of the game a little bit are--
I mean, part of my passion
is that now that I
am really, really
convinced that the missing link
in not only-- see, what we know
from this technique is that when
energy shifts into the higher
brain of people, they start
to feel like what I described
happened to me spontaneously
many, many years ago.
They start to feel more
confidence, more clarity, more
empowerment, more purpose.
All of that starts to
show up because they're
getting energy and metabolism
in that part of the brain.
So we have a system.
This is a 22-step program,
45-minute long sessions
with a trained licensed
facilitator that shifts energy
into this higher
part of the brain.
And as that happens, they're
able to take this guidebook
and apply that to all
areas of their life.
So they basically
create a new life.
Higher consciousness
Now when a significant
minority of people
elevate their consciousness,
change their brain physiology,
create a new life, a
significant minority of those
has enough impact to
create a new culture.
>>LISA: How big is that
significant minority?
>>COTTON: Well, my
feeling is it's 1%, OK?
The historian Paul
Tillich has shown
that the Renaissance, which
was actually the major surge
from the mythic stage into
the rational, or mental, stage
of development--
the Renaissance was
the first really
major piece of that.
The ancient Greece
started it, but that's
where it really moved up.
He says that the Renaissance
was the result of the actions,
and behaviors, and
new ways of thinking
of 500 to 1,000 people.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>COTTON: And that
that was the catalyst
that created the tipping point.
So I think in today's
age, it's going
to be much more than that.
But it does not
require everyone.
>>LISA: So that's interesting.
So does somebody have
to have a purpose,
or even want to have
a purpose in order
to have this work be effective?
>>COTTON: Oh, by no stretch--
in fact, a lot of people
come because they
don't have purpose.
And one of the things that
happens-- and that's, I think,
Lisa, in the business you're
in, you can relate to this.
But there's so many people
out there right now.
In fact, I believe that
whole postmodern stage
of development-- that's been
our leading edge right now--
in that there's so many of us
out there that are feeling this
shift that know that--
>>LISA: Something's out there.
>>COTTON: Something's
out there, and we are not
fulfilling all that's
possible for us.
We're not living up
to that potential.
That there's more.
And that so many people find us
because that's stirring inside
of them.
>>LISA: It's one of the
biggest-- I have been doing
this for 13 years, at
least, interviewing people--
and it's one of the main
titles that comes through.
And every book that's
submitted to me
has got the word
purpose in the title.
>>COTTON: Right.
Right.
>>LISA: People are
looking for their purpose,
wanting a purpose-driven life,
knowing that that gives them
fulfillment, and passion,
and satisfaction.
But they don't know
how to get to it.
>>COTTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And it's true.
When you don't have a
purpose-driven life,
you die in certain
areas of your life.
>>COTTON: Henry David Thoreau
had a wonderful quote.
He said most men and women
live lives of quiet desperation
and go to the grave with
their song still in them.
>>LISA: M-hm, very well said.
Yes.
So now I mentioned earlier,
it's a gentle-touch therapy.
So how does the touch, and where
did you discover those points?
>>COTTON: Right.
>>LISA: And how do
they move energy?
>>COTTON: Yeah.
Great.
So we all know,
you know, and I'm
sure television viewers,
everyone watching this show
knows that there's an
untapped part of our brain.
That's not really
breaking news, right?
That there is
potential in there.
>>LISA: We only use 10%.
>>COTTON: Yeah,
we've heard that.
There's potential in there.
Let's just say there's
potential in that higher brain
that we're not using.
That's a pretty general
agreement there.
So let's connect that dot.
Now the next thing is
that I'm sure that most
of your viewers and you
also know that there's
a latent energy source in
the body that's associated
with certain
pathways in the body.
Through this 5,000-year search,
there's an energy in the body
that's been called everything
from prana, to chi, to ki,
to kundalini, to subtle energy--
a variety from Taoist healers
to--
>>LISA: See, it could even
be the electronic system that
runs through the blood
in medical terms.
Yeah, of course.
>>COTTON: Right.
And so we know that
there's a latent energy
source, untapped energy
source, in the body.
We also have known
for thousands of years
that it's associated with
certain pathways in the body.
Everything from Nordic
points and yoga philosophy
to meridians and traditional
Chinese medicine.
There are certain pathways
that have some relationship
to this latent energy.
>>LISA: OK.
>>COTTON: What we've done
with higher-brain living
is we've cracked a
code around this.
We've looked at
these pathways, one,
from a very scientific
perspective.
>>LISA: OK.
>>COTTON: There's now
a research showing
that these pathways
in the body are
what's called piezoelectric.
And that's a term that means
that they release energy
when they're compressed,
or touched, or contacted
in just the right way.
And so we've patterned out a
very specific protocol where
we cue these pathways in
a very unique way, gently
in a very unique
protocol that leads
to this piezoelectric effect,
this release of energy
in the body.
And through our
system, it travels
to the prefrontal
cortex of the brain.
>>LISA: Have you measured this?
>>COTTON: Yes.
We've measured it
numerous times with EEG.
>>LISA: OK, with the EEG.
So you're able to see
these electronic pathways
in the body, this energy
system, and it going and rushing
to the prefontal cortex?
>>COTTON: Yeah.
What we're actually not
measuring are the pathways.
What we're measuring is
the change in the brain.
>>LISA: OK, got it.
The end result.
>>COTTON: So we're able
to cue these pathways.
What happens is that when you
cue these pathways in just
this right protocol, this-- this
piezoelectric release of energy
is moving into the higher brain.
Now this is very, very gentle.
Not a lot of people will
actually feel energy building
in their higher brain.
What happens next is the
extraordinary part of it
because what happens
next is that it's
a nudging that dormant
part of your brain awake.
And so that dormant
part of your brain
starts to wake up just a little.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>COTTON: And it
starts to come online.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>COTTON: And what
happens then is
it starts to create-- your
brain starts to create
its own feedback mechanism.
So these these paths
are gently cued
in this very revolutionary
protocol that
causes a release of energy
to go into that highest
part of the brain.
When it wakes up,
then it starts to want
to fulfill that evolutionary
potential that's in there.
And it starts to
generate its own--
>>LISA: Energy.
>>COTTON: Energy, exactly.
And the first
thing that you feel
is a breath response we call a
salutogenic breath because it's
a feedback mechanism
produced by the brain.
And that breath starts to move
through your body from head
to toe.
It doesn't feel like
you taking the breath.
It feels like you're
being breathed,
or something is breathing you.
>>LISA: We're going to
have the opportunity
to see this on a table.
But how did you-- did you
go through trial and error
to find these specific points?
Did you--
>>COTTON: Yes.
And throughout this long search,
many, many, many different
disciplines were touching
on different pieces of this.
You'll see some of the
contacts that I'll make.
For instance, in this
area, I found references
to Taoist healers
thousands of years ago
that were talking about
doing certain pathways,
and breath changes in the
body associated with this.
Certain pathways, different yoga
systems, or Vedantic systems,
have referred to as some of
the lower chakras in the body.
And a more modern NSA
care cues similar pathways
and certain ways,
cranial sacral therapy.
So there's all kinds of
these different systems
that I think have
been tapping in it.
But what we have done
is put this together
in a revolutionary way that
is consistent, repeatable,
reproducible, and very
fast, and very integrated
within your life.
>>LISA: But does it last?
>>COTTON: And it lasts.
And that's the real
beauty of it is
that, through this
22-step program,
not only do you get
that upload, but you
start to apply it to your life.
You start to bring that
higher-brain energy
to your relationships, to your
finances, to your occupations,
to your dreams, to your visions.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>COTTON: What I'm maintaining
is that that's the only way it
will last because if the lower
brain has its hooks in it--
>>LISA: Right.
>>COTTON: If it hasn't
loosened its grip,
it's going to cycle you back
around into the same life.
>>LISA: Abosolutely.
Absolutely.
>>COTTON: And that's
the missing link.
>>LISA: What is your
goal with this technique?
Before we have a chance
to talk to some people who
are going to try this
technique and experience it,
what is your overarching
goal with this?
>>COTTON: This is going to be
a very big vision and a very
big statement.
And I always have some
reservations about these things
because it can come across as
sounding kind of self-serving.
And it's not meant to be.
But if you ask me honestly,
and authentically,
and transparently, my goal
within this and my vision
within this is to
see, in my lifetime,
higher-brain living be
a significant vehicle
in shifting consciousness
in our culture
that has ramifications worldwide
in creating that sixth epoch
or next stage of human
consciousness, and culture,
and brain function.
>>LISA: M-hm.
Absolutely.
Well, I would love to talk
to some of these ladies who
are going to be
experiencing this
and find out-- so
they've experienced
this technique in the past?
>>COTTON: Yep.
>>LISA: So we can talk to them
about how their lives maybe
have changed a little bit
from-- or maybe a lot--
>>COTTON: You bet.
>>LISA: From this technique.
>>COTTON: What I would like to
do, Lisa, if it's OK with you,
is I'm going to do a
demonstration with them showing
how I cue these pathways.
>>LISA: OK.
>>COTTON: I'll condense it
down to 5 or 10 minutes, which
would ordinarily be a
45-minute long session.
And then have them sit
up, and then maybe just
have them tell of
their experience?
Does that sound good?
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>COTTON: All right.
>>LISA: All right.
>>COTTON: Perfect.
>>LISA: Thank you.
We're going to take a break.
And we're going to go and
look at the table right now.
>>COTTON: Awesome.
>>LISA: All right.
Thanks.
>>COTTON: I'm going to
do a higher brain living
demonstration
session with Lizzie.
Lizzie, are you ready?
>>LIZZIE: I am.
>>COTTON: All right.
Let's go.
Face down on the table please.
Now sessions are
usually 45 minutes long,
but we're condensing
them for this video.
So there's an untapped
part of the higher brain
and an untapped energy
source in the body.
And I'm going to cue these
pathways in just the right way
in this revolutionary protocol
that causes a release of energy
to go into that higher brain,
that prefrontal cortex.
And when that happens, it
creates its own feedback
mechanism to energize itself.
And you can see
how the breath is
starting to expand
in Lizzie's body.
See that three-dimensional
expansion of breath?
And you can even hear it.
If the mics can pick it up,
you can hear the breath.
[BREATHING]
That's an automatic
feedback response
her brain is now creating.
She's not making that happen.
She feels it happen.
She's letting it happen.
We call it a salutogenic breath.
And it's a signal
that this energy
from cuing these pathways,
that piezoelectric effect,
moved into the higher brain.
And it started to light up
some of that dormant potential.
And that dormant potential
is coming online.
And it's saying
oh, this is good.
Let's fulfill all of that
potential that's in there.
And so now it's creating
its own mechanism
to bring more
energy up to itself.
And as this is
happening, Lizzie will
be feeling a sense of
confidence, clarity, joy,
all of those things that are
associated with the higher
brain.
And over this 22-step
program, which
includes 22 sessions
and the application
of this higher-brain
energy to your life,
there's a shift in
center of gravity
that happens through
this 22 step program
where the lower dominant
brain gives its stuff up,
loosens its grip.
And the energy starts to
become stabilized, or available
always, in the higher brain.
And that's the way permanent,
long-term transformative change
happens because it's that
part of the brain that
wants to grow, that
wants to create.
It's the lower brain
that wants to stay stuck
and wants to stay the same.
And this process is consistent,
reproducible, repeatable.
And what you see
right here shows up
in virtually everyone on
the very first session
of the 22-step program.
And this is just the beginning.
And all of the contacts
are very gentle,
but they're very precise
in a sequence that
causes the flow of energy into
the untapped part of the brain.
Occasionally,
someone will ask me
if she's in a trance, or
hypnotized, or something.
And it's actually just
the opposite of that.
She's very, very aware.
Say hi, Lizzie.
>>LIZZIE: Hi.
>>COTTON: She knows
that it's happening.
She feels it happening.
She's not making it happen.
She could stop it if she wanted.
She could even make
herself just stop it.
But the sense in her is
that my lifetime of stress
is clearing out of my
body and out of my mind.
I feel incredible right now.
Why would I want to stop this?
So this is a very
condensed session,
but you can really
get the point.
And I'm going to have
Lizzie set up in a moment.
And Lisa, you can talk to her.
And then we'll bring Sunny up
and do a demonstration even
beyond this.
So Lizzie, could I have you
sit up please nice and slow?
That was awesome.
>>LIZZIE: That was awesome.
>>LISA: So how do you feel?
>>LIZZIE: Energized,
peaceful, energy
flowing through the body.
>>LISA: Do you feel
any different now
than you did before
you got on the table?
>>LIZZIE: Yes, I
mean my whole body
is undulating and vibrating
inside with energy.
Clarity of mind, centered,
grounded, energy flowing.
>>LISA: Do you set an intention
before you sit on the table?
>>LIZZIE: A lot of
times I do for my body
to take in as much energy
shift as it possibly
can at that time, to
expand with that energy,
to hold that energy, to
completely shift with it.
My body just starts going.
When you get those
points activated,
your body just starts wanting
to flow naturally with that.
I didn't force my body to
do that in any way, shape.
It just naturally
just started going
into this release of old energy,
taking in the new energy.
>>LISA: So you didn't
force that breath at all?
>>LIZZIE: No, it
just naturally goes
into-- it's a breath that goes
into release and expansion.
And so it's an
unwinding, so to speak.
>>LISA: Mmm, really nice.
>>LIZZIE: So your body
just goes into this unwind.
You feel the body do
an unwind with it.
>>LISA: Has your life changed
as a result of these sessions?
>>LIZZIE: Absolutely.
>>LISA: In what way?
>>LIZZIE: I've had
three sessions so far.
And within from the
first one to now,
things have-- my night vision--
I used to have night blindness.
That cleared up in
the first session.
I was driving on the
freeway that night.
I went oh my gosh!
I can see!
It's actually bright out!
So that was the first
physical thing I noticed.
When problems arose,
solutions quickly followed,
and very stress-free,
implemented those things
into my life.
I found that I could
activate things much faster.
The solutions came.
No procrastination--
I've found that I
can't procrastinate anymore.
When a thought enters my-- my
thought enters, I take action,
and I complete it.
>>LISA: Your focus
is really major.
>>LIZZIE: Right.
You don't think about it.
Think oh, I'll do that tomorrow.
It just instantly happens.
And it flows right into it.
And you go wow, I just
got that all done.
And I usually would have
lamented and procrastinated.
Oh, I could do that tomorrow.
And it just happens.
>>COTTON: Procrastination is one
of the mechanisms of the lower
brain because if it projects
everything into tomorrow,
and tomorrow never comes, you
never really have to change.
>>LISA: Keeps you safe.
>>LIZZIE: Yes.
>>LISA: All right.
So now we're going to hear from
Sunny who is a practitioner.
>>COTTON: Yep.
>>LISA: And Sunny, if you could
join us over here, we could--
>>COTTON: I was going to do
a session with Sunny first.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
Great.
>>COTTON: Is that good?
>>LISA: Yeah, absolutely.
>>COTTON: I'll do a session
just like we did with Lizzie,
and then I'll set her up
and-- thank you, Lizzie.
>>LIZZIE: You bet.
Thank you.
>>COTTON: This is Sunny.
Sunny has had even
more sessions.
She's been through the
full 22-step program.
Sunny is also now a licensed
trained facilitator.
She's pursued the higher-brain
living training model.
And so she practices in
the Los Angeles area.
So Sunny, I would like to
have you lay face down.
And we'll get started.
>>SUNNY: OK.
[BREATHING DEEPLY]
>>COTTON: Hear the breath,
the solutogenic breath?
Remember, that's an
automatic feedback response
that her brain is creating to
pump more energy up to itself.
And now that she's more
advanced in the process,
it's using a larger wave,
a potential that's untapped
in there are these mechanisms
in the brain to self-energize.
And so now it uses
that larger wave
to dump all of the
old lower brain junk.
It clears the pathways
out so that that breath
can expand again, bringing
more metabolism up
to the frontal
structures of the brain.
We've even been able to
measure this with EEG.
When this is happening, we
can see increased energy
in the highest
part of the brain.
[BREATHING]
And all of this is completely
spontaneous and feels amazing.
Gentle contacts, very
specific protocol
create a release of energy,
a piezoelectric effect
moves up to the prefrontal
cortex of the brain.
That dormant potential wakes
up, starts to come online.
And it starts to perpetuate
its own energy up to itself,
and uses this wave to dissipate
all of the lower brain junk
to further let
those pathways flow,
and let that energy build
in the higher brain.
And as dramatic as this feels,
the inner experience of it
is hallelujah.
It feels amazing.
It feels like all of
the stress of your life
is clearing out all
of you right now.
Right, Sunny?
>>SUNNY: Yeah.
It's awesome.
[CHUCKLING]
>>COTTON: Again, these are
45-minute long sessions
that we're greatly condensing
for brevity within this video.
And I'm going to have
Sunny lay onto her back.
And you'll see a
progression as this happens.
Go ahead and flip over,
Sunny, onto your back.
And you can let
your brain and body
continue to do whatever
it wants to do on its own.
[GIGGLING]
And giggling is very, very
common through a session
because joy is one
of the functions
in the prefrontal
cortex of the brain.
[GIGGLING]
[BREATHING IN]
[EXHALING]
And so the evolution
into that next epoch,
what I believe to really
stretch things for this video,
are that the new human that
creates the new culture
is able to energize
the prefrontal cortex,
start creating a new
life from that space.
And, as this happens,
the heart starts to open.
And there's an integration
of the open heart
and the prefrontal
cortex of the brain.
This is not unique.
This happens through the
process for virtually everyone.
>>LISA: Can I ask you
a couple questions?
>>COTTON: Yes.
I'm going to go
ahead and sit her up.
Is that OK?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>COTTON: Sunny,
nice and easy, yeah.
Take your time.
>>LISA: I'm just going to
ask you a couple questions.
>>COTTON: Sure.
>>LISA: While you're just
take a moment there, Sunny.
You're doing something
with your arms
where you're going like this.
Are you pulling energy
in from somewhere?
>>COTTON: Well,
you know, there's
a couple ways for
me to describe that.
One of the them is
is that-- we all
know this-- to not
get too ethereal,
but there's concentric
fields of energy around us.
That's a hard fact now,
electromagnetic energy
and potentially subtle energy.
Yes.
And so we're sensitive
to that energy,
but there's also an
element where there's
kind of the entry and
the follow-through
to use a sporting
analogy, even someone
that's a professional
golfer or something.
How they approach the
ball and the follow
through after the
ball has a lot to do
with what happens to the ball.
Not just the moment of impact.
And so it's kind of
along those same lines.
>>LISA: OK.
>>COTTON: That how
we're coming in
and how we're going out
has an impact on how
those pathways are cued and how
that piezoelectric effect moves
to the higher brain.
>>LISA: OK.
>>COTTON: And I can teach this.
We have a whole training
program that we--
>>LISA: How long does that
training program take?
>>COTTON: Well, there's a
couple of different models.
And if they get on
higherbrainliving.com
on our website,
they're able to find
where I'm doing different
presentations where
I talk about that
whole training model.
But just to be brief,
there's four online modules.
And then there's
on-site modules.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>COTTON: Two five-day
on-site modules
or two ten-day on-site
modules depending on
if it's standard or
advanced licencing
on-site in a location.
>>LISA: And what made you put
this into a training course?
What inspired you to do that?
>>COTTON: Well, when I opened my
first practice in the Midwest,
I had a waiting list of
people trying to come in.
I knew a lot about the
evolution of consciousness.
I knew a lot about
developmental psychology.
I had a lot of friends
in those fields.
And, to be just perfectly
frank, the results that we
were seeing, the
changes in people's
life, and knowing that the brain
was changing in association
with that, it was so powerful,
the transformation that
was happening, that I knew that
it had to get into the world.
And so that's why.
>>LISA: And is there
an energy exchange that
happens between you and the
subject, or you and Sunny?
Are you trying to stay
as neutral as possible?
>>COTTON: There's a
very specific protocol
that we go through.
What she's doing on the
table happens every day
in facilitators' offices
that are trained.
We have a lot of
people now trained
in the higher-brain
living technique.
And so, you know,
that's not really
even part of my thought process.
I'm just kind of flowing
through this protocol,
and her body is organically
expressing itself as bodies do.
This is what's inside of us.
This is the capacity
that's in the brain.
Some of the wavelike
movement is a primal pattern.
There's been evidence for that
showing up thousands of years
ago.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Interesting.
So I want some of what
you're having here, Sunny.
How are you feeling over here?
>>SUNNY: It feels so good.
>>LISA: You feel good?
>>SUNNY: Yeah.
I explain it as
being blissed out.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Yeah.
Can you sleep after this?
Are you energetic, or--
>>SUNNY: Oh, yeah.
You know, sometimes I
get really creative.
I love that because,
at one point,
some of my creative
juices were not
flowing as much as I
would like them to.
But my sleep-- even if I
have a short night's sleep,
it's very restful.
>>LISA: And you
wake up energized?
>>SUNNY: M-hm.
And I process a lot in my dream
state as well, which is great.
>>LISA: And on purpose.
Let me ask you
about mood swings.
If you're stressed out,
or if you're dealing with,
you know, different
people who are
upset with you, job,
work, kids, family.
I mean, do you handle those
things in any different way?
>>SUNNY: Yeah.
What I found was
that I used to be
more attached to the emotion
of a situation, or a story,
or get too much into what the
other person was going through.
>>LISA: M-hm.
>>SUNNY: And it
really harbored things
that would progress for me.
>>LISA: So that's how
you were in the past?
>>SUNNY: Yeah.
And I really recognized it
when I had this difference.
And so--
>>COTTON: Your
awareness increases.
You really can see it.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>SUNNY: Exactly, yeah.
So now I feel like I'm able to
approach a situation, or even
a person, a friend,
a parent, you know,
with a different perspective.
And I can listen to
them fully and recognize
what they're going through.
I'm not attached to it myself.
So--
>>LISA: Are you more of an
observer on your emotions now?
>>SUNNY: Yeah.
>>LISA: Is that what
you were saying?
>>SUNNY: M-hm.
>>COTTON: Yeah.
The lower brain reacts.
It's caught in its world.
The higher brain can take
that view from 50,000 feet
and then respond from
these new potentials.
>>LISA: Is that what
you've experienced?
>>SUNNY: Most definitely.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Very interesting.
>>SUNNY: Yeah.
I always thought that I
was on a really good path
to be able to do that
stuff, and lead people,
you know, with my
background and everything.
But--
>>LISA: Being in--
>>SUNNY: I'm a naturopath,
but not fully doing it.
And then now you
recognize, you know?
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
So you already were
into the healing arts,
but this has amplified
that experience for you?
>>SUNNY: Yeah.
M-hm.
I knew right away that this
is what I wanted to do.
>>LISA: And when you are
working on other people--
let me ask you a
question, if I can,
about the potential
for this healing abuse,
emotional, physical,
sexual abuse--
have you heard that
from anyone that
has been able to release that
type of pain in the body?
>>SUNNY: Yep.
And what ends up
happening through--
I'll just go with testimonials
because obviously, you know,
you can't like claim--
>>LISA: Right.
No, no, no.
>>SUNNY: --is going
to be with everybody.
So I've had a couple
of people that
have had abuse and
trauma, as well.
And they have been able to let
their body, or the emotion,
come up with that.
But they've come
to terms with it.
And now they're letting it go.
They're able to grow
from where they are now.
>>LISA: In present time.
>>SUNNY: Knowing that
that's part of their past,
it doesn't matter.
They're really just fulfilling
what their dreams and passions
are now, recognizing
it, and they're
able to separate from it.
So some of the emotion leaves,
even if they cry about it
or get angry, it's
really not-- they're not
attached to that
emotion anymore either.
>>LISA: And they're
in more present time?
And not living in
that past moment?
>>SUNNY: Completely.
Yeah.
They're really
embracing the moment.
>>LISA: There is a lot
to be said for that.
Well, thank you very much.
Thank you so much for inte--
>>COTTON: Great, great fun.
>>LISA: To us.
Absolutely.
And thank you so much.
I hope you learned
as much as I did.
If you'd like to watch my
replay with Dr. Michael Cotton,
you can watch it by
going to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invited you, as always,
to stay inspired.
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]